considered/rfc-meta-moveborrow.md, before:

- Feature Name: (fill me in with a unique ident, my_awesome_feature)
- Start Date: (fill me in with today's date, YYYY-MM-DD)
- RFC PR: (leave this empty)
- RFC Issue: (leave this empty)

Summary
=======


Motivation
==========


Guide-level explanation
=======================

Two needs have emerged somewhat simulaneously to improve the language:

- The capacity to identify an object as containing a unique value. This is
  similar to what's called a rvalue reference in C++.
- The capacity to control the number of aliases and allowed read / write
  operations for objects pointed by dynamic memory. This is similar to Rust
  borrow semantics.

These two concept introduce commonly new notions to the Ada programming
language, notably the concept of moving and borrowing an object.

This part of the RFC is about defining these two notions, used in following
RFCs:

- limited references, used to implement uniqueness of values
- safe access, used to control usage of dynamic memory.

Move
----

A move operation is a new Ada operation that allows to move a value from an
reference to another one. Once a value has been moved, it cannot be refered to
from the previous reference, which needs to be assigned to a new value before
being used. Depending on the situation, this can be checked at run-time, by the
compiler or by static analysis and formal analysis tools.

This concept of move can be used in various ways by specific proposals. However,
it can be used right away in Ada through the use of the 'Move attribute. When
applied to a pointer, the semantic of a move operation is:
- to assign the value from the source pointer to the target pointer
- to reset the source pointer to null.

For example:

```Ada
   type A is access all Integer;

   V1 : A := new Integer;
   V2 : A;
begin
   V2 := V1'Move;
   --  At this point, V2 points to the object previously pointer by V1
   --  At this point, V1 is null. Accessing V1 is erroneous.
```

Move can be used for other types. For example:

```Ada
   type Handle is new Integer;

   V1 : Handle := 0;
   V2 : Handle;
begin
   V2 := V1'Move;
   --  At this point, V2 has the value of V1
   --  At this point, accessing V1 is erroneous.
```

Note that move operation introduce erroneous execution which may or may not
be automatically detectable. The compiler must:
- issue a compiler error where incorrect usage can be statically detected
- issue a compiler warning where incorrect usage is possible

For example:

```Ada
   type Handle is new Integer;

   V1 : Handle := 0;
   V2 : Handle;
begin
   V2 := V1'Move;

   Put_Line (V1'Img); -- compiler error, used previously moved value
```

```Ada
   procedure (X : in out Handle) is
   begin
      V2 : Handle;
   begin
      V2 := X'Move;
      --  compiler warning, X may be used after moved
   end;
```

Borrow
------

A borrow operation is a temporary move operation, introduced by the 'Borrow
attribute. Borrowing is always scoped, it starts on the initial introduction of
the 'Borrow up until the end of the scope of the reference receiving the borrow
(which could be a variable, a parameter or a temporary value). Is is equivalent
to doing a 'Move in one direction, then on the other at the end of said scope.
An additional constraint is that a borrow operation is always constant. For
example, in the context of a local constant:

```Ada
   type Handle is new Integer;

   V1 : Handle := 0;
begin
   declare
      V2 : constant Handle := V1'Borrow;
   begin
      null;
      --  At this point, V2 has the value of V1
      --  At this point, accessing V1 is erroneous.
   end;
   --  At this point, V1 can be accessed again, V2 is out of scope.
```

Or in the context of parameter passing:

```Ada
   V : Handle;

   procedure P (Param : Handle);

begin

   P (V'Borrow); -- V is borrowed during the call
   --  V is accessible again here
```

Note that this synax works for dynamic objects too - at compilation time, a
straighforward implementation is to generate a temporary for the borrowed
pointer in order to be able to restore it, so that:

```Ada
declare
   V2 : constant Handle := X.Y.Z'Borrow;
begin
   X := new Some_Structure;
end; -- still release the value of the previous pointer
```

is equivalent to:

```Ada
declare
   V2 : Handle;
begin
   -- tmp = X.Y.Z'Access;
   V2 := X.Y.Z'Borrow;
   -- X.Y.Z = null
   X := new Some_Structure;
   -- tmp.all = V2
end; -- still release the value of the previous pointer stored in tmp
```

Note that the borrowed value needs to be locally scoped. The following is
illegal:

```Ada
   G : Handle;

   procedure P (V : Handle) is
   begin
      G := V'Borrow; - compilation error, borrowing to a value outside of scope
   end P;
```

Swap
----

Move semantics are also provided with a 'Swap attribute, which allows to
exchange two values using move semantics, e.g.:

```Ada
   A, B : Handle;
begin
   A'Swap (B);
```

It's important to provide this primitive, as move semantics do not allow to
temporarily topy a value as it's usually done in swap implementation.

Thread-Safety
-------------

By default, Move and Borrow operations are not thread-safe. However, it is
possible to introduce this thread safety with 'Sync_Move, 'Sync_Borrow and
'Sync_Swap respectively. In these cases, the move operations (or back & forth
move operations) are done atomically.

This does not guarantee however that asynchronous operations are free of
erroneous behaviors. Notably:

```Ada
   X : Handle;

   task T1 is
      Y : Handle;
   begin
      Y := X'Sync_Move;
   end T1;

   task T2 is
      Y : Handle;
   begin
      Y := X'Sync_Move;
   end T2;
```

In the above code, one of the task does the proper move operation. For the
other, accessing X is erroneous.

TODO: see how rust works that out!!!


Reference-level explanation
===========================

See above.

Rationale and alternatives
==========================

Drawbacks
=========

See above.

Prior art
=========


Unresolved questions
====================


Future possibilities
====================

Commit message:

further considerations for synchronized move semantics

considered/rfc-meta-moveborrow.md, after:

- Feature Name: (fill me in with a unique ident, my_awesome_feature)
- Start Date: (fill me in with today's date, YYYY-MM-DD)
- RFC PR: (leave this empty)
- RFC Issue: (leave this empty)

Summary
=======


Motivation
==========


Guide-level explanation
=======================

Two needs have emerged somewhat simulaneously to improve the language:

- The capacity to identify an object as containing a unique value. This is
  similar to what's called a rvalue reference in C++.
- The capacity to control the number of aliases and allowed read / write
  operations for objects pointed by dynamic memory. This is similar to Rust
  borrow semantics.

These two concept introduce commonly new notions to the Ada programming
language, notably the concept of moving and borrowing an object.

This part of the RFC is about defining these two notions, used in following
RFCs:

- limited references, used to implement uniqueness of values
- safe access, used to control usage of dynamic memory.

Move
----

A move operation is a new Ada operation that allows to move a value from an
reference to another one. Once a value has been moved, it cannot be refered to
from the previous reference, which needs to be assigned to a new value before
being used. Depending on the situation, this can be checked at run-time, by the
compiler or by static analysis and formal analysis tools.

This concept of move can be used in various ways by specific proposals. However,
it can be used right away in Ada through the use of the 'Move attribute. When
applied to a pointer, the semantic of a move operation is:
- to assign the value from the source pointer to the target pointer
- to reset the source pointer to null.

For example:

```Ada
   type A is access all Integer;

   V1 : A := new Integer;
   V2 : A;
begin
   V2 := V1'Move;
   --  At this point, V2 points to the object previously pointer by V1
   --  At this point, V1 is null. Accessing V1 is erroneous.
```

Move can be used for other types. For example:

```Ada
   type Handle is new Integer;

   V1 : Handle := 0;
   V2 : Handle;
begin
   V2 := V1'Move;
   --  At this point, V2 has the value of V1
   --  At this point, accessing V1 is erroneous.
```

Note that move operation introduce erroneous execution which may or may not
be automatically detectable. The compiler must:
- issue a compiler error where incorrect usage can be statically detected
- issue a compiler warning where incorrect usage is possible

For example:

```Ada
   type Handle is new Integer;

   V1 : Handle := 0;
   V2 : Handle;
begin
   V2 := V1'Move;

   Put_Line (V1'Img); -- compiler error, used previously moved value
```

```Ada
   procedure (X : in out Handle) is
   begin
      V2 : Handle;
   begin
      V2 := X'Move;
      --  compiler warning, X may be used after moved
   end;
```

Borrow
------

A borrow operation is a temporary move operation, introduced by the 'Borrow
attribute. Borrowing is always scoped, it starts on the initial introduction of
the 'Borrow up until the end of the scope of the reference receiving the borrow
(which could be a variable, a parameter or a temporary value). Is is equivalent
to doing a 'Move in one direction, then on the other at the end of said scope.
An additional constraint is that a borrow operation is always constant. For
example, in the context of a local constant:

```Ada
   type Handle is new Integer;

   V1 : Handle := 0;
begin
   declare
      V2 : constant Handle := V1'Borrow;
   begin
      null;
      --  At this point, V2 has the value of V1
      --  At this point, accessing V1 is erroneous.
   end;
   --  At this point, V1 can be accessed again, V2 is out of scope.
```

Or in the context of parameter passing:

```Ada
   V : Handle;

   procedure P (Param : Handle);

begin

   P (V'Borrow); -- V is borrowed during the call
   --  V is accessible again here
```

Note that this syntax works for dynamic objects too - at compilation time, a
straighforward implementation is to generate a temporary for the borrowed
pointer in order to be able to restore it, so that:

```Ada
declare
   V2 : constant Handle := X.Y.Z'Borrow;
begin
   X := new Some_Structure;
end; -- still release the value of the previous pointer
```

is equivalent to:

```Ada
declare
   V2 : Handle;
begin
   -- tmp = X.Y.Z'Access;
   V2 := X.Y.Z'Borrow;
   -- X.Y.Z = null
   X := new Some_Structure;
   -- tmp.all = V2
end; -- still release the value of the previous pointer stored in tmp
```

Note that the borrowed value needs to be locally scoped. The following is
illegal:

```Ada
   G : Handle;

   procedure P (V : Handle) is
   begin
      G := V'Borrow; - compilation error, borrowing to a value outside of scope
   end P;
```

Swap
----

Move semantics are also provided with a 'Swap attribute, which allows to
exchange two values using move semantics, e.g.:

```Ada
   A, B : Handle;
begin
   A'Swap (B);
```

It's important to provide this primitive, as move semantics do not allow to
temporarily topy a value as it's usually done in swap implementation.

Thread-Safety
-------------

By default, Move and Borrow operations are not thread-safe. However, it is
possible to introduce this thread safety with 'Sync_Move, 'Sync_Borrow and
'Sync_Swap respectively. In these cases, the move operations (or back & forth
move operations) are done atomically.

White thread-safe, Sync_Move does not guarantee that asynchronous operations are
free of erroneous behaviors. Notably:

```Ada
   X : Handle;

   task T1 is
      Y : Handle;
   begin
      Y := X'Sync_Move;
   end T1;

   task T2 is
      Y : Handle;
   begin
      Y := X'Sync_Move;
   end T2;
```

In the above code, one of the task does the proper move operation. For the
other, accessing X is erroneous. Depending on the run-time behavior, this
can be however bounded. For example, if X is a pointer, its value is null and
dynamic checking on the value of Y can be made (ie - did I manage to move the
value indeed).

'Sync_Swap is an atomic operation. It is thread safe.

'Sync_Borrow creates a lock on the object itself so that no other thread
can either move, swap or borrow the value synchronously.

Reference-level explanation
===========================

See above.

Rationale and alternatives
==========================

Drawbacks
=========

See above.

Prior art
=========


Unresolved questions
====================


Future possibilities
====================
